[ forgot to sing "Horororora" ]
[ forgot to sing "Horororora"]
Hello, and welcome to another episode of "No Such Thing as a Fish" a weekly podcast
this week coming to you live from Oxford!
[ Cheers and applause ]
My name is Dan Schreiber, and I am sitting here with Anna Chazinski, Andrew Huntson Murray,
and James Harkin, and once again, we have gathered around the microphones with our four favorite
facts from the last seven days, and in no particular order, here we go.
Starting with you, Andy.
My fact is, that hippos sometimes poo into rivers so much that all the fish downstream die.
This is such cool science.
What if you're a fish?
Yeah.
This is a horror story if you're a fish?
Yes, true.
So, quick shout out to the scientists who did this, the team who did this was scientist Chris
Dustin and Amanda Subulloski, and the hippos poo a lot into rivers.
Basically, pooing is one of the main things that hippos do, and they do it for, you know,
all sorts of purposes, communication, and mostly to get it out of their bodies, mostly for
pooing purposes, but is technically called organic matter loading, if one I call it, surely it's
unloading.
Depends what, if you're loading the river?
I guess.
Oh, yes.
No, I don't know.
No, you're right.
You're right.
Well, I'm not sure I am.
But, so they eat a lot of grass, and they eat it at night because it's cooler when they're
out of the river feeding, and in the daytime, they wallow in the river to stay cool.
So this was on a river called the Mara between Kenya and Tanzania.
There are 4,000 hippos living in this river, and these hippos deposit 8,500 kilos of waste
every day into quite a short section of river, and it turns into this huge sludge at the
bottom of the river, and then in the dry season, the river shrinks and dries up a bit.
But then when it rains, this massive tidal wave of hippo poo gets churned up, and all
of this sludge gets washed down, and it doesn't have much oxygen in it because of all
the bacteria, which have been consuming the poo.
So the oxygen levels in the water plummet, all the fish die.
So it's bad news if you're a fish, but it's good news if you're something that eats fish,
and don't mind a little bit of pooey aftertaste.
Yeah.
You're definitely sending that back, if you're at a restaurant.
The fish looks great.
It's just the hippo shit all over at this.
So things like stalks, fultches, crocodiles, hyenas, but they eat these fish really quickly
once they die off.
And actually, the researcher says if you weren't there to see it, you wouldn't know it's happening
because it happens so quickly that they come and eat all this stuff.
Wow.
It's a really good way of the nutrition cycle almost happening through the ecosystem.
Yeah.
The researchers who did this, it was in Kenya, wasn't it?
And they couldn't do it themselves.
They couldn't go and analyze the poo themselves because hippo is very dangerous.
They're the most dangerous of the large mammals in the world, actually, in Africa.
So they kill estimates seem to vary between 503,000 people in Africa every year.
But so the researchers didn't really want to go near that.
So they sent in some boats, and they got advice from a mass eye guy who said, "Disguise
your boats as crocodiles."
And so they disguised their boats as crocodile heads, which went around collecting data on
their poo.
That's amazing.
Because they get along quite well hippos and crocodiles.
They do.
But actually, it's a bit of a relationship that seems a bit skewed towards the hippo in
that the crocodile just needs to be a bit passive when it comes to a hippo and they're interacting.
I've seen footage of a baby hippo using the back of a crocodile, basically as a teething
ring just to...
But they do some of the hippo babies.
It's quite bold for it to be chewing on a crocodile as a ring because they do occasionally
flip around and swallow a baby, which I imagine doesn't happen with the natural baby's
teething ring.
So this is very rarely...
Yeah.
You'd have a very strong case.
There's a few products on Amazon with one star of the year going, "Hey, my fucking kid."
So she brought down toys around, isn't it?
But yeah, in this case, it's because the children, obviously, they could take on.
It's when a mother is babysitting near a crocodile and they're watching the biting going on.
So the crocodile has to just put up there?
Just take it because they're like, "I don't want to start anything here."
I think I read that a hippo can bite a crocodile in two, which doesn't sound plausible,
but they're very, very powerful draws.
They're very strong draws, don't they?
They're going to easily snap a boat into it if they want to.
Like, you know, not a cruise ship, but a robot or something.
Just back to the organic matter loading thing.
So the thing they do, which is really communicative with other hippos, is that they use their tail
as a propeller and they spray it over a very wide area.
Spray that poo.
They put it over a wide area because their tail is going round and round and round like a propeller.
Like, it hits in the fan, isn't it?
It is exactly that.
That's it.
Yeah, they do seem to spray it around willy-nilly.
And the use of the flirting, don't they, they're spraying.
So they both, both sides, both genders float with their feces.
So the males will mark their territory with this big spray of poo,
which they can spray a couple of meters with their tail.
And then the female, if she's impressed, will respond by turning round to face him with her ass,
so to not face him, and to, and then she'll do the whizzing, the poo whizzing.
And it's called submissive defecation.
Do you know that hippos can't get cholera?
And they think that one of the reasons is because they throw their poo around so much.
So I surmise if humans start throwing their poo's around.
Eventually, after thousands of years, and millions of deaths,
you'll have humans who are covered in poo but can't get cholera.
Look, no one's saying that it's going to be great to, it's like Brexit.
No one's saying that it's going to be great to start off with, but eventually.
The cholera is, well, because it moves the poo far away from them.
Well, because they have a lot of contacts to the bacteria or whatever it is.
If they could get cholera, they'd be dead, is that right?
Right. So they've got some sort of immunity.
Yeah.
OK.
Because they do eat it as well, don't they?
Go on, really.
Babies eat their mother's feces, because they have that unfortunate thing,
which some species have, where babies are born without any functioning intestines.
They don't have any live bacteria in their insides.
The only way they can get that is to eat their mother's poo.
So as soon as they're born, they've got to start showing down on that.
There is a lot of time.
We briefly mentioned hippo testicles before, but I found out just a little bit more about them.
So I thought we should return to that wellsprung.
So there's a great article in Discover Magazine, which is headlined
why it's nearly impossible to castrate a hippo.
So the problem, first of all, you're going to get pretty close to it.
That's true.
I can't do that with a remote control crocodile shaped boat.
Although you won't be able to use the jars, does that?
Yeah.
But there are a problem in some places, obviously,
because they are a bit of a pest.
They're very prolific breeders as well.
So they can produce 25 calves in 40 years.
So before you know it, you've got loads of hippos.
So the problem with castration, as a, you know,
to spread it across, you know, loads of hippos in a pest area,
is that their testicles are hidden inside their bodies.
And there's a paper in the journal Theory of Genology,
which names all the difficulties in castrating hippos.
Number one, the penis is apparently discreet.
I've used that excuse.
It's just being polite.
And also the testicles are not in the same place
from one hippo to the next.
So they can vary by up to 16 inches between different animals.
So if you cut in, trying to remove the hippos' testicles, they're not there.
So a game of pin the testicles on the hippo could lead to a pretty much stick-pin anyway.
You're correct, yeah.
But the problem is that they can retract further during surgery,
which we've said, they can retract them further into their body,
they can flee the surgeon's knife.
And also, it's very hard to anesthetize a hippo.
I mean, there are so many problems.
Yeah, just don't do it.
Don't castrate them.
Although they are a pest, as you say.
And they are a particular pest, of course, in Colombia, right?
So this hippo's known for really hanging out in Africa.
But Pablo Escobar in Colombia had this zoo.
The Pablo Escobar massive Colombian drug lord, obviously, was shot in 1993,
left behind his massive menagerie of weird animals.
And they got rid of most of them.
But people didn't notice at the time, I don't think,
that he had a bunch of hippos living in his lake.
I mean, you don't notice it.
Didn't spot him. Didn't spot him.
They look like rocks.
And so, and they've bred.
And it was, eventually everyone's attention was drawn to this in 2007.
So he died in 1993, 2007.
Fisherman started calling the local council, or whatever it is.
And reporting--
My fish tastes a bit like hippo-shit.
Sales have really plummeted.
No, they're calling up and reporting creatures
with tiny ears and huge mouths.
And they genuinely didn't know what they were, these people.
And they were hippos.
And so now there are about 60 of them
that are just living in this tiny area in the rivers and lakes.
And apparently, you'll be in this nearby town.
And you'll see a hippo just wandering down the road.
Wow, it's very exciting.
That's very, very.
We're going to have to move on in a second.
I've found an interesting thing.
The first pharaoh of the United Egypt was killed by a hippo.
He was called, yeah, King Menors.
And we only know it from a single line,
as far as I can tell, by historian called Manatho,
who just simply wrote, Menors was the first king.
He was snatched and killed by hippopotamus.
And nothing else.
We don't know.
We don't know the circumstances.
We don't know what he was doing at the time.
What a legacy.
We do know what it's like to be swallowed by a hippo,
or to half swallowed.
Because there was a guy a few years ago
called Chris Broughton, who was on the Zambezi.
And basically, he said, before he knew it,
he was inside a hippo.
I said, I was aware that my legs were being surrounded by water,
but my top half was almost dry.
I seem to be trapped in something slimy.
There was a terrible sulfurous smell, like rotten eggs,
and a tremendous pressure against my chest.
My arms were trapped, but I managed to free one
and felt around my palm pass through the wiery bristles
of the hippo's snout.
It was only then that I realized I was underwater,
trapped up to my waist in his mouth.
Wow.
It's not amazing that we know what that's like.
And then he managed to get himself.
He rigged as much as he could.
He managed to get free, and there were people there
who could drag him away.
Wow.
So his arm was going up through the hippo's air waves
and out of its nose?
Yeah.
No, through their mouth.
He had to reach further into the hippo
and then back out through.
I thought he was coming up through the nose, out of the nose.
He clambered his way out of the ear in the end.
If God he didn't go through the anus, he would have been propelled.
OK, it is time for fact number two, and that is Chazinski.
My fact this week is that there are monks in India
who avoid going out in the rain in case they splash through puddles
and upset the microbes in them.
And these are Jane monks and people who follow Janism.
So you know, Jane's the people who basically don't believe
in harming any living creature.
And this goes right down to all bacteria
which basically live in everything and on everything.
And so as soon as the monsoon comes,
you're not allowed to leave your house if you're Jane
because you might immediately be killing stuff
because they believe that these tiny creatures,
which they called Nagoda, and they believed in hundreds,
thousands of years before we even discovered microorganisms,
they believe that these tiny creatures
existed sort of everywhere in puddles, in damp environments.
And if you touch them, then they're going to get upset, even die.
And so they can't go out in the rain.
And if you hurt them in any way, then you go to hell.
Is that the idea or...?
You just won't be reincarnated, I don't think,
as well as you might have.
It's not as bad as hurting a human, which is a higher being,
but it's still not ideal.
So these guys are the ones who sweep the streets
so that they don't stand on any insects and stuff, is that right?
And they wear masks so they don't inhale them.
They don't go out at night because you men...
Someone said they don't go out at night because the light's not good enough,
and so you can't see what you're eating.
And so you might think you're eating a piece of bread,
but it could be a bunch of small insects.
Which...
I'm no gormonde, but...
I think I can tell the difference.
It's incredibly hard life being a Jane.
So Jane monks, you know, it's an older sister religion of Buddhism.
So they're very, very, very keen to avoid the pleasures of the flesh,
extremely keen.
So Buddhist monks shave their heads.
Jane monks pluck out their hairs one by one in a deliberately painful ceremony.
Buddhist monks beg for their food.
Jane monks are not allowed to beg.
They're not even allowed to beg.
There's a hand gesture you can make, a bit like they arch their right hand over their shoulder.
Which I think is like this.
It's kind of like the beginning of "I'm a little teapot."
And that's to show hunger, but they cannot directly ask for food.
Oh, really?
But then if you do that gesture, then people do sometimes give you something, don't they?
Yeah, people say that's, oh, he's hungry, yeah.
Yeah, because there is the thing, there are basically two main variants of Janeism.
And one is called Digambar, and one is Fettambar.
And the Digambars are the Skyclad or Naked Jains.
And they are not allowed to own any material possessions.
And this is if you really strictly adhere.
So this is the monk and the nuns.
So they have to be naked all the time, if they're those monks,
because you're not allowed to own clothes, because they're material possessions.
And that causes some... You can have a iPhone, though, can you?
Obviously, you can have an iPhone.
Where would you keep it?
It's not going to that.
Could you rent a Tuxedo, for example?
Because then you don't own it.
You don't own it. You just rent it?
Oh, yeah.
But how would you pay for it?
Good point, no money.
I don't know if Tuxedo rental existed 3,000 years ago, and they sort of founded it.
So maybe they've updated it.
But those ones can't even own a bowl.
So they have to ask for water by cupping their hands,
and then it all slides through their fingers before they can drink it.
I think they're allowed to drink from God, aren't they?
Are they? I think so, yeah.
I think one sector is the other sector.
I believe so. Wow.
Because the other sector, which are allowed to work clothes,
are still only allowed to wear white, aren't they?
And this thing about how they don't want to hurt any animals.
This, if you look back in their stories of their history,
there were 24 Jane Ford makers.
They were the prophets who kind of started the whole thing.
And one of them was so bothered about not harming anything at all
that before he was born, he floated perfectly still in his mother's womb,
sending not so much as a ripple throughout the amniotic fluid
to avoid harming his mother.
Wow.
So thoughtful.
They're the epitome of thoughtful.
They're what we all should strive towards, really.
And so some of them wear a mask to stop inhaling insects,
but there's controversy about the masks,
because some people say that it's a good thing to wear a mask
because the breath from your mouth is hot.
And if you don't wear a cloth, you might scorch microscopic beings
in the air, kind of like Godzilla.
Kind of. He didn't wear clothes either.
He didn't wear clothes.
So some people say that if you do wear a cloth,
that might be a bad thing, because your breath is moist,
and that might give rise to microorganisms in the cloth.
And then there will be more living and dying because of you breathing.
So they'll die when you handle it.
So problem.
It's a tightrope, isn't it, that you've got to walk?
And it's slightly tougher for women.
Although I will say, I think they have much more egalitarian views
than a lot of mainstream religions.
And generally, they're kind of great.
But they do have this slight thing
where if you believe in the naked shanism, the sky-clad James,
then women can't quite attain proper enlightenment, proper nirvana.
And that is because women can't be naked,
because it's inconvenient for them, apparently.
I don't understand why it's more inconvenient for women
to be naked than for men to be naked.
It seems equally inconvenient.
But also, so one, women can't be naked, because it's inconvenient.
And two, women can't be naked, because they are intrinsically harmful.
And this is actually based in the understandable belief
that women's periods kill loads of creatures as they happen.
So as-- and I don't know what it--
I think maybe you think it's just sort of--
I'm noticing that body form advert.
[LAUGHTER]
Well, that was the idea.
The inspiration was basically the death
of thousands and thousands of these tiny organisms,
so you couldn't quite achieve nirvana as a woman.
But you could come still quite close.
I've got a tangential fact about Jainism.
And it's actually to do with a lot of Eastern religions.
So we may have mentioned before that swastikers
are quite big in Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism,
and they're big in Jainism.
And I found out in the course of researching this,
I didn't know this, in the year 2013.
And in fact, a few years since then,
there was a day called Learn to Love the Swastika,
which was aiming to rehabilitate the swastika
because it's an ancient symbol.
But it seems to be working.
You see the lot more of it, these days.
It's going really well.
But to raise awareness of the symbol
and its history as a peaceful symbol,
tattoo artists around the world
offered people free swastika tattoos.
It's just true.
This happened.
And there were lots of articles about it.
And there was a report from La Journal International,
which said this, "When a beamy journalist questioned
one of the tattooists about the probability
that neo-nazis might take advantage of the event,
the latter answered that even if that was the case,
these people will leave with a symbol of love on their body."
You've just got to let some things go, don't you?
I think you've got to leave the swastika behind.
There was a guy in America that I read about years ago
who went through World War II.
And he lived in, I believe it was Ohio in America,
whose name was Adolf Hitler.
And he refused to change his name.
He ended up becoming famous for it, people interviewing him,
saying, "Why have you not changed your name from Adolf Hitler?"
And his response was, "I'm not going to let one guy
ruin the good name of Adolf Hitler."
Just on mic-- sorry, I thought it was distraction.
Just on microbes.
I was looking up lots of stuff about microbes
because of the puddles and microbes in them.
Did you know the Oregon has an official state microbe?
No, I didn't know that.
What is it? It's bakers yeast.
Because it's very important to craft brewers and craft bakers,
if they exist.
But lots of states have discussed having a state microbe.
And I think so far, Oregon's the only one which said,
"Well, they've got the best one, haven't they?"
They've got a good one. There are other good ones.
So Wisconsin proposed in its parliament,
Lactococcus Lactis, which is very crucial for cheese production,
because you get a lot of cheese in Wisconsin,
but that didn't get through.
Hawaii suggested a bacterium, which was found on a native shrub,
but then there was a rival camp who wanted a different state microbe.
I was a huge argument in the Hawaiian parliament about some people
said, "No, we want this one, which lives in a symbiotic relationship
with a squid."
And all the people-- all the people who wanted the shrub ones said,
"Yeah, well, the shrub lives in Hawaii.
It's a native to Hawaii, and the squid lives everywhere."
The squid one is Vibrio fish scary, isn't it?
I love that microbe. They should definitely have gone with that.
I know, I know. The other one, actually.
Oh, here we go again.
All right, let's take this outside.
The one on the bush.
I like the one on the bush.
Are they going to such a massive route that they scrap the whole thing?
Do we think America hasn't got its priority straight?
Fills that they've got bigger fish to fry.
We're going to have to move on very shortly.
Can I just talk about how you couldn't kill a microbe if you really wanted to?
Yes, yeah.
Because the repaying the arse and antibiotics are struggling,
and so people have been really looking into how else we can kill microbes,
and they're quite hard to squash.
So actually, this is something that James probably have got wrong,
because they're so small, obviously, they're like a thousandth of a millimeter
that you can't, they'll get into a crevice before you can probably squash them.
So there's a scientist called Elena Ivanova,
and she works in Australia, and she's worked really, really hard to create surfaces
so smooth that bacteria will just slide off them without being able to hold on.
But some of them can still cling on, so that's failed.
And she was really panicking about why I don't know how to kill these microbes,
but they're still clinging to my society surfaces.
And so she wrote to another scientist and asked if he had any ideas.
And he said, try the cicada wing, and what an earth.
But she got a cicada wing, so you know, cicadas, they took a wing off.
And it turns out that if you put a bacterium onto the wing of a cicada,
it gets punctured all over, spills all its guts out, little bacteria guts,
and at least to a quick death, and gecko skin is even better.
It's really hard to kill them, and it's really hard to kill them by stamping.
You can do it if you really put a huge amount of pressure on.
You can't kill them.
If you press food, there's a process called Pascalization,
and if you press food with 87,000 pounds per square inch.
Right.
You just make all the bacteria go pop.
I'm not going into your restaurant.
We serve extremely flat food, extremely competitive prices.
How heavy is that?
Sorry? 87,000 pounds.
It's a lot.
It's more than all four of us put together.
OK, it's a lot more.
Yeah, by as I imagine.
But it depends how we arrange it, right?
So if I was wearing one stiletto shoe and you all climbed on my shoulders,
then I think that might be enough concentration of weight.
If we were all hippos.
And that, yeah.
But it's not a good idea to do it.
So Science ABC, they looked into it, and they said,
stomping around your house in a bid to sanitize or sterilize your floor
is a bad idea.
Honestly, you don't want your family to see you,
and think you've lost your mind.
[LAUGHTER]
OK, we need to move on to our next fact.
It is time for fact number three.
And that is my fact.
My fact this week is that during the Second World War,
while American pilots were flying over enemy territory,
not only were they shooting at that enemy,
but they were also often making ice cream at the same time.
How are they doing it?
They weren't just churning it while they were.
No, exactly.
So this was a big thing during World War II
that I'd never read about before.
Ice cream was massive for the troops.
It was to help them with calories and sustenance,
and it was a food that got banned by most other countries.
Britain, for example, banned ice cream during the war.
Yeah, as a sustenance thing.
As a rationing thing, basically, because it's sugar,
and we don't need to use all that sugar.
Yeah, exactly.
They suggested a carrot on a stick as an alternative.
That didn't go down.
On a stick?
The carrot is the stick.
Yeah.
What was the point of shoving a stick up a carrot?
So it looks like an ice cream.
I'm just saying that carrots can be used as a stick,
because carrots don't melt in the same way that magnums do.
Yeah.
You would have been court-martialed at this point, mate.
Just stick with the program.
It's a waste of sticks.
Surely we need sticks for the war effect.
Do you know weaponry had come on quite a lot further than that?
That's a lot more.
All in the stick battalion following me.
So what this was is that they were constantly
making ice cream in very creative ways during the war.
And one of the things that they discovered
is that you could take a sort of drum,
put all the ingredients inside of it,
and attach it to the back of a plane.
So as you flew over, you were reaching about 30,000 feet up
in the air, very cold up there.
So you had the coldness to make it freeze.
But also, the vibration of the engine, the machine gun
going, were churning all the ice cream products around.
So by the time that you'd down some enemy planes
and landed back on your aircraft in the ocean,
you could go and have a big scoop of ice cream off
the back of your airplane.
That's so cool.
There was a guy called Jay Hunter Reinberg,
who was one of the first people, maybe the first person
to do this.
And the first time he put the ice cream too close to his engine
so it couldn't get cold enough.
And so it was a bit like Goopy.
They still let it, of course.
But then the second time, he flew 33,000 feet over Palau.
And so he went high, high enough.
So it was really, really cold.
And the good advantage of that is, number one,
it meant that the ice cream froze.
But number two, it meant that none of the Japanese aircraft
could shoot him, because he was so high.
And so they just kept shooting at him
and the bullets couldn't reach him.
So he was just watching it all going on below him.
- Wow. - Wow.
- Wow.
- I kind of didn't realize how easy ice cream is to make.
I haven't tried it.
I haven't just read about it still.
So maybe it's not-- - Yeah, it sounds at the moment.
It sounds like you need a plane.
So--
[LAUGHTER]
Imagine if you got your pilot's license just for that.
But you can-- I was reading a--
there was a thing in the New Yorker by someone who said,
she went to a friend's house and the friend said for dinner.
And the friend said, great, who's
for ice cream for pudding?
And everyone was like, yeah, great.
And so the friend went away and she came back.
And she had one ziplock bag.
And then another much larger ziplock bag.
And basically, she filled the small ziplock bag
with vanilla extract and sugar.
And then she closed that.
And then inside the larger one, she filled that
with ice and salt.
And salt is the crucial ingredient for making ice cream, isn't it?
And then she shook the bag about a bit.
Got tired, passed it around the table.
So it's quite a fun past the past,
or kind of dinner party experience.
And by the time it got back around to, that's ice cream.
But it's because ice and salt makes an endothermic reaction.
So it sucks all the heat out of your ziplock bag
with vanilla in it.
This doesn't sound like a great party.
I have to say.
[LAUGHTER]
So just other things that during World War II,
they used ice cream for the US Navy.
So in order to get ice cream to a lot of people,
they had a lot of the Navy ships that were out and about.
There was one specific ship, which they
spent $1 million converting at the time, which
was effectively an ocean ice cream factory.
And that's all it did.
It created ice cream.
It could do 10 gallons every seven minutes.
And it would just go to various different Navy ships
and deliver them ice cream.
Yeah.
It's about--
I was just looking at that amount that it could do.
It's the equivalent of doing one Ben and Jerry's
tub every five seconds.
Wow.
Didn't need to only be in extremely rough seas all the time
to turn it up.
No, because you've got the engine kind of going round
the propellers and stuff like that.
So it was still powered by the engine.
Yeah.
And also, the enemy could always hear it coming
because of the chimes in the back of the air.
It was a flawed system, yeah.
But there's reports, apparently, of these ships
that when they were attacked by the Japanese,
for torpedo hit it, there are a few accounts of sailors
before they were abandoning ship and jumping overboard,
running to the bit of the ship that had the ice cream,
scooping as much as they could into their helmets,
eating that, and then jumping off.
So just a quick bowl of ice cream before--
That was in the USS Lexington, which
had a lot of ice cream on board, wasn't it?
Yes.
Yeah.
This is-- I should just very quickly say,
I've gotten a lot of this information
from the Atlantic online.
But the ocean?
Yeah.
I speak to oceans.
Just on-- you mentioned chimes just now, James.
So there used to be--
I didn't know this-- in the UK, I believe--
250,000 ice cream vans.
And as I say that, that sounds insane.
Today, there are a few of them, 2,500.
And one of the main threats to them is, can you guess?
The sun.
Yes, yes.
I kind of, I guess.
Yeah.
I've got children growing up.
But more come to replace them, that doesn't make sense.
Yeah, exactly.
Is it the health code, people?
Yeah, all of these are really good answers.
But there's one thing that you haven't mentioned yet.
Double glazing.
Because you can't hear the chimes if you're double glazed.
Yes.
In 2017, the head of the trade body, the ice cream association,
by the way, awesome, said that new homes are so energy efficient.
They've got double, sometimes even triple glazing.
And children might not hear a van right outside their house
when it's playing a chimes.
So they launched an app for smartphones called Vantut,
which alerts you on your phone with an electronic jingle
if there's an ice cream van nearby.
No, it's really cool.
That's so cool.
In the 1980s, in Glasgow, there was an ice cream war
between two gangs who were selling drugs and stolen goods
from ice cream vans.
Ooh.
Yeah.
So it was really a drugs war.
No, James said it was done from ice cream vans.
Well, it was quite serious, actually.
But it was all in the news.
And everyone was having to go at the Strathclyde police
because they weren't solving all these crimes.
And the local newspapers called the police,
the Sirius Chimes Squad.
Oh.
They should have called for Magnum PI.
Ah.
Thank you guys.
Very strong.
So the jingle used to be, before it was playing music,
it used to be a man shouting, "Hokie Pokie."
Because it's really cool.
That is the Italian for "Oh, Chipoke."
So it's a bastardisation of that.
And "Oh, Chipoke" means, "Oh, how small."
I have heard that a few times this time.
Because about 1/10 of Italian immigrants
in the 1890s were selling ice cream, weren't they?
Yeah, I think about 10%.
Well, about 10% of vendors, and they were basically
all ice cream vendors.
And so that came about.
But in the 19th century-- so the ice cream was.
It's not the first time it's been associated with a vice.
Because in the 19th century, ice cream parlors
became a very big thing.
This is especially in America.
And it was because women, basically,
weren't really allowed to go to places on their own.
And I see a chaperone.
And this started becoming more and more
of a thing as a century progressed.
So you'd turn up to a restaurant and they'd be like,
where's the chaperone?
And then they'd kick you out.
And so they sort of came up with ice cream parlors, which
became a place that women were allowed to hang out by themselves.
And they were called parlors to mimic the homey cozy life
that we ladies desire.
And--
But they, of course, turned into hotbeds of vice immediately.
So there was all this disapproval because it
was thought that without formal chaperones,
women were just turning up and keeping
awful company and going out with really bad men.
And there were rumors about ice cream
drugged with passion-exciting vanilla.
And lots of-- there was one journalist who wrote,
I think, in the New York Times, that he
went into an ice cream parlor.
And he saw a man and woman deep in conversation
who were evidently man and wife, though not each others.
It's amazing that vanilla was so--
because that's the shittest of all the flavors these days.
Isn't it?
Very raunchy back then.
Yeah, I love the hall of a hornetto, please.
You could say.
Yeah, you could.
You could, you could.
We're going to have to move on shortly.
Before Connets, they used to sell ice cream in penny licks.
And these were little-- this was in London.
They used to sell them in little glasses,
but they're a little bit bigger.
And they're almost like sundae-- what you put Sundays in.
What they would do is they would give you your penny
liquor, put ice cream in it, and then you would return it
to them, and then they'd give it a quick wipe,
and then put some more ice cream for the next person
to do it.
Sometimes not even a wipe, right?
It was--
That was bad for the bacteria.
And that is why ice cream cones became quite popular, wasn't it?
Yeah, because they were banned in 1899
because they were causing the spread of tuberculosis.
Right.
But right.
That was bad.
And then the cone came about, and it was a huge deal.
So this was the 1904 World's Fair that the ice cream cone
was invented.
So there were instances of appearing kind of in a few cookbooks
in the 19th century, but it was suddenly made popular
at the World's Fair.
And it was this huge thing in the 1904 World's Fair.
So if any of you have ever seen Meet Me In St. Louis,
and I don't know why, the song is pronounced like that,
but it was about the World's Fair that was in St. Louis.
And it was a huge deal.
So they had sort of like bears made of prunes at the World's Fair
and what they had.
Just what everyone's always want to say.
What's the point of the bear made of prunes?
Everyone loves a prune.
Yeah, true.
A bears and exotic thing.
There you go.
I think they did actual snarling.
They had a massive landscape sculptured entirely from butter.
They were showing the new refrigeration technology.
So they had a milk made, milking a cow,
but all of it was made of butter.
And they had Roosevelt on a horse, Teddy Roosevelt,
the president at the time, on a horse.
What was he made of, peaches?
It's all butter.
OK, it's all butter.
But anyway, sorry, they made the ice cream cone there.
Because there was ice cream on display,
and no one had thought of eating it like on the hoof.
And then they realized people wanted to try it.
And so, near by waffle vendor, curled his waffle round
into a cone shape and said, try this.
And hence, the cone was invented.
But there's this great historian who's really looked into this.
And she's found seven different people
who claim to have invented it at that one fair.
They're like, so there was a Syrian guy, a Lebanese guy,
a Turkish guy, someone from Ohio, all saying they'd done it.
But there was born the ice cream cone.
Well, it's a simple history of the ice cream.
And you know that it's better to eat ice cream by licking it
than with a spoon.
So, yeah.
And the reason is that the flavor in ice cream
is released when the fat content comes out of it.
And that comes when it warms up.
And because your tongue is warmer than a spoon,
and it's got a larger surface area,
it's better to put it on there, and then it kind of melts
and you get the flavor, whereas if you do it with a spoon,
then it's still cold when it goes in your mouth
and you don't get all the flavor,
because you swallow it before you can.
Just a tip.
It's a top tip.
Yeah.
There's a guy who can tell the difference
between 12% and 11.5% pot of fat in ice cream.
He gets invited to a lot of parties.
He's an official ice cream taste tester,
and he was called John Harrison.
He was the ice cream taste tester for dryers,
from 1980 to 2010, so for 30 years.
And he had his tongue insured for $1 million.
In fact, the company had his tongue insured for $1 million.
So they always say this.
We've ensured your tongue for $1 million.
What's the risk?
There isn't a gang of roving tongue thieves.
It's a very precious tongue, I'd get it if I could.
He would know that.
[LAUGHTER]
No.
And before you can explain what that means,
it is time for fact number four.
Our final fact of the evening is James.
OK, my back this week is that in 1997,
a town in Saskatchewan held a referendum
on whether the end of a toilet paper
should hang under or over the roll.
And luckily, that was the last time anyone ever
asked a stupid question by means of a referendum ever again.
[LAUGHTER]
So this was a local election in Saskatoon, which
in Saskatchewan, and they were trying out new voting machines,
basically.
And so what they wanted to do was have a trial question,
which was nothing to do with any kind of politics
and wouldn't get people riled up.
And so they said, what do you think
should be the official town microbe?
The question was, are you in favor of toilet paper
in all public washrooms being installed
with the loose end coming up and over the front of the roll?
And the answer was 80% over.
OK, and so they said they didn't want it to be political.
Oh, we've got a few over fans in here.
Oh, OK.
That was definitely 52%.
In Sunderland, they feel completely the other way about it,
all right?
But yeah, one teenager did a science project about it
and did a survey and found that liberals usually
go for over while conservatives usually go for unforeseen.
Really?
Actually, it was quite political after all.
And was it enacted, as in did all public washrooms
follow the overwhelming mandate of--
I think it became the rule, but I'm sure there isn't a person
who goes around checking them all.
So it wasn't legally binding.
[LAUGHTER]
It might be for me to criticize the people's choice,
but I think they got that absolutely wrong.
Oh, really?
The toilet roll thing, that's insane.
And there's no wonder liberals go for over the top,
because over the top, waste so much more
rule, because it easily gets--
Don't waste more?
Yeah, it absolutely does.
It just waste more.
It falls down more easily, especially if you've got a cat.
It's not cascading down.
Oh, yeah.
Like, no, if you've got a character, you have a cat.
You've got a cat or if you get home drunk.
You're not one of those guys, guys.
So what was the moment that no such thing
as a fish really ended?
[LAUGHTER]
Wow.
I feel tense.
Some more referendums that have happened.
Oh, yeah.
So since that will work, sell that.
No, but it's really interesting.
So lots of-- America is really big on this.
So in the USA, they have extra referendums
kind of attached to votes that they're having.
So you might have a state or a national election,
and you'll just depend a few extra votes,
which are yes, no, things normally.
So and some of them are quite fun.
So in 2006, Arizona voted on whether to give a million dollars
to a single resident chosen by lottery simply for voting
to encourage turnout.
Yes, and I guess we get a million dollars.
It was called the Arizona Voter Reward Act,
and they rejected it.
Classic.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
Classic human.
They think, what if it's not me?
[LAUGHTER]
There was a great one, which was in Castlewood, Virginia.
And this was in 1997.
And the question for the vote was, should we exist?
And school.
Yeah.
And they decided they shouldn't.
And they no longer do.
What are you talking about?
Well, I think it was quite a tiny community
that was right next to a bigger community,
but it came with a lot of extra taxes off the back of existing.
So they said, let's not exist.
So they abolished themselves and became part of Russell County.
Yes.
But they had literally only existed for a couple of years.
They'd signed this big petition saying, we want to exist.
We want to exist.
We want autonomy.
We want a government.
Great.
Let's do it.
So they bloody did it, and then straight away.
They were like, taxes.
What do you talk about, fuck off?
[LAUGHTER]
Literally, immediately, the second administration
they put in power was this mayor called Roy Castle,
whose whole platform was to abolish their existence.
Wow.
So people are able to change their minds
and have another vote a bit later if they feel like that.
I do.
[APPLAUSE]
Shuttle, very subtle.
By the way, this show isn't going out
for about three more months, so fuck does it.
Oh, fine.
Yeah.
You'll be able to trade this for food,
this episode of the podcast.
[LAUGHTER]
You'll be all sitting around your carrot sticks at home.
It's on a stick.
I mean, you can make carrot intersticks.
That's the weird thing.
Just some other good referendums.
In 1993, San Francisco had a referendum,
and it was on whether one specific policeman could
patrol with a ventriloquist dummy.
And they got pretty into this.
So this is this great guy called Bob Geary,
who was a community policeman, and he
was given the remit to make policing more creative and ingenious.
And he did that by spending a lot of money
on a big wooden ventriloquist dummy and going about.
And he probably learned how to do it.
He got all these tapes.
He practiced in front of the mirror.
And he called it, and he called it Brendan O'Smarty,
as sort of like a flip on the idea of a dummy.
And he dressed it up in police uniform with a water pistol,
patroled the streets.
And then eventually, the person in charge of police
complained and said he had to leave it in the car.
And so he got enough signatures for a referendum.
And it happened.
And bizarrely, the result--
I find so unfathomable, the result of the referendum
was just 51% to 49% in favor.
Who were the 49% voting against a policeman having a dummy?
I reckon it's probably the other policeman who,
when they call for backup and Brendan O'Smarty walks out.
With his water pistol.
Hello, there's a very, very, very small fire
that needs putting out.
He said Brendan.
He cost $1,700, which in 1993 was not nothing.
He already owns it, so he doesn't need to buy a new one, does he?
I guess not.
No.
Still.
I'm part of the 49% saying no to officer explanation.
It was to entertain children, wasn't it?
Oh, yeah.
To entertain people, I think.
And he did manage to apprehend criminals with it.
No, it was dog.
Apparently, there was more than one suspect
that he took down with the dummy in one hand
and the suspect in the other hand.
Are you kidding?
No.
Did he do a good cop bad cop with the dummy?
Look, I managed to hold him off you,
but I can only restrain him for so long.
[LAUGHTER]
Let me out of-- let me out.
I'm going to-- he's going to shout, let me out of-- let me out of--
well, I'm drinking a glass of water now.
[LAUGHTER]
There was another just speaking of entertainers in Sao Paulo.
There was a Brazilian clown who was called Tirerica,
who won an election.
And he was going for a federal deputy.
And this was in 2010.
He-- it was a question as well, which was, does anyone really
want to know what happens behind government doors?
That was simply it.
And everyone went, yes, someone's going to tell us the truth.
And it won him the election, but he was a clown.
And did he reveal-- did he--
I should have read the rest of the article earlier.
[LAUGHTER]
Can I talk about House of Lords votes?
Because they're quite weird.
So first of all, so that Lords aren't allowed to vote
for MPs, which is fair enough.
There was actually quite a good article
looking at funny voting comments over the years.
And apparently, in 1948, then someone
in America said that he got in touch with the House of Commons.
Because he was interested in the qualifications
for voting in England.
So he called the reference library in the House of Commons.
And he received the following pronouncement.
In Great Britain, any adult 21 years
or over may register and vote except peers and lunatics.
And we make an exception for the latter
if they have a moment of lucidity.
And that bombup was in 2016.
Well, they can't vote for MPs.
But they do have their own elections.
And they're often quite weird.
So in 2016, there was a by-election in the House of Lords.
It was to replace a Lib Dem peer called Eric Lubbock.
It was actually a very cool guy who wanted to leave his body
to bathe his dog's home to bury their diet.
But that's--
[LAUGHTER]
Besides the point, anyway, he died.
So someone had to replace him.
And the only people who qualified to vote to replace him
are the other Lib Dem hereditary peers,
of which there were three.
And there were seven candidates.
So they had a proper election where three people voted
for seven candidates.
Wow.
I think the only election where there are more candidates
than voters.
That was really good.
There was, in 1862, there was a referendum in Greece
because the people overthrew King Otto
and decided to hold a referendum to decide who
would take his place.
There were 240,000 votes counted.
And the winner was a guy who got six of them.
And that's because the Greeks voted 95% for Prince Alfred
who was British, but Britain, France, and Russia
had signed a treaty saying that no person from any of those countries
was allowed to take over.
OK, so the guy who got six votes was William of Denmark,
who took over on Julie Raid for 50 years.
Did he say how many votes the first guy got Alfred?
He got 95% of 240,000, so I'm sure you can work that out.
Yeah.
There were 93 people who voted for having a republic
rather than any King at all.
And there was one vote to bring back King Otto.
I wonder who that was from.
We're going to have to wrap up in a sec.
Oh, I've got one last fact about presidential elections,
which is just not really on referendum's.
But this was sent in by someone in the audience tonight.
Someone called Charlie Guinness.
Genness?
Oh, yeah.
And it's this.
Is that, in the 1948 US presidential election,
the Democrats commissioned a Papier Mache Donke,
which was designed to have smoke belching from its nostrils
to make it look impressive and intimidating.
Unfortunately, all the smoke came out of its back end, instead.
[LAUGHTER]
Amazing.
That's a good fact.
OK, that is it.
That is all of our facts.
Thank you so much for listening.
If you'd like to get in contact with any of us
about the things that we have said over the course of this podcast,
we can be found on our Twitter accounts.
I'm on @Sriberland, Andy.
@AndyHunterM.
James.
James Harkin.
And Shazinski.
You can email Pockost@QI.com.
Yep, you can go to our group account as well,
which is @NoSuchThing or our website.
NoSuchThing is a fish.com.
We've got everything up there from our previous episodes
to upcoming tour dates.
OK, that is it.
That is all of our facts.
Thank you so much.
Good night.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
(upbeat music)